ICS 2: Consensus Verification (#20)
cosmos/ics: spec/ics-2-consensus-requirements/README.md

---
ics: 2
title: Consensus Verification
stage: proposal
category: ibc-core
requires: 23
required-by: 3
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
created: 2019-02-25

> modified: 2019-03-05

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modified: 2019-03-29
```

---

## Synopsis

> Consensus verification requires the properties that the chains on the network are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard specifies the properties that consensus algorithms of chains implementing IBC are
```

> expected to satisfy. The properties are needed for efficient and safe verification on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expected to satisfy. The properties are needed for efficient and safe verification in the 
```

> higher level mechanics, such as connection and channel semantics. The algorithm who uses these 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
higher level protocol abstractions. The algorithm which uses these 
```

> properties to verify another chain is referred as "lightclient", which is embedded on the chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
properties to verify substates of another chain is referred to as a "light client".
```

## Specification

### Motivation

> 

Reviewer: I think we should talk about the full node - light client correspondence here - what we ultimately want is a cheap way for a blockchain to verify the results of the consensus process of another blockchain.

`Header` defines required properties of the blockchain on the network. The implementors can 
check whether the consensus that they are using is qualified to be connected to the network or 
not. If not, they can modify the algorithm or wrap it with additional logic to make it 
compatible with the specification. It also provides base layer for the protocol that the other 
components can rely on.

### Desired Properties

> 

Reviewer: This should also talk about desired properties *of the specification* - namely that it cleanly abstracts over the kind of consensus algorithms which IBC can support by providing a minimal set of requirements for efficient & safe verification.

* Blockchains, defined as an infinite list of `Commit` starting from its genesis, is linear; no 
conflicting `Commit`s can be both validated, thus no data can be rewritten after it has been 
committed. Two `Commit`s are conflicting when both has same height but not equal.

* Verifiers can verify future `Commit`s using an existing `TrustedCommit`. When the verifier 
validates it, the verified header is in the canonical blockchain.

> * `TrustedCommit`s contains an accumulator root(ICS23) that the other logics can verify whether 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `RootOfTrust`s contains an accumulator root(ICS23) that the other logics can verify whether 
```

key-value pairs exists or not with it.

### Technical Specification

#### Definitions

> * `TrustedCommit` is a blockchain commit which can be used to prove future commits, stored in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `RootOfTrust` is a blockchain commit which contains an accumulator root and the requisite state to verify future roots of trust, stored in
```

  one blockchain to verify the state of the other.

>   Defined as 3-tuple `(v :: Commit -> (Error|TrustedCommit), r :: AccumulatorRoot)`, where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Defined as 3-tuple `(v :: Header -> (Error|RootOfTrust), r :: AccumulatorRoot)`, where
```

Reviewer: ... also, `v` is a function defined on a particular consensus algorithm, we don't actually store it per se.

I think `v :: RootOfTrust -> Header -> Error | RootOfTrust` is better, what do you think?

Author: One of the reasons I chose this expression is, if we denote the verifier as a field in the `RootOfTrust`, it is possible to update it independent from the actual `RootOfTrust`, meaning that we can upgrade lightclient verification logic within the connection update semantics without breaking the interface.

>     * `v` is the verifier, proves child `Commit.p` and returns the updated `TrustedCommit`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `v` is the verifier, proves child `Commit.p` and returns the updated `RootOfTrust`
```

    * `r` is the `AccumuatorRoot`, used to prove internal state

> * `Commit` is a blockchain header which provides information to update `TrustedCommit`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Header` is a blockchain header which provides information to update `RootOfTrust`, 
```

>   submitted to one blockchain to update the stored `TrustedCommit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  submitted to one blockchain to update the stored `RootOfTrust`.
```

>   Defined as 2-tuple `(p :: CommitProof, tc :: TrustedCommit`, where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Defined as 2-tuple `(p :: CommitProof, tc :: RootOfTrust)`, where
```

... also I don't know if we want to pass a whole new root of trust, I think we could pass a subset usually

Author: Modified to `(Maybe<v>, r)` which updates the accroot and optionally the verifier.

    * `p` is the commit proof used by `TrustedCommit.v` to verify
    * `tc` is the new `TrustedCommit` which will replace the existing one after the verification
 

> * `Consensus` is a blockchain consensus algorithm which generates valid `Commit`s.

Reviewer: I don't understand this definition, can you explain? I think the below section is better.

  Defined as a function `Commit -> [Transaction] -> Commit`

> * `Blockchain` is a subset of `(TrustedCommit, [Commit])`, generated by a `Consensus`.

Reviewer: Ditto.

#### Requirements

Consensus verification requires the following accumulator primitives with datastructures and
properties as defined in ICS23:

* `AccumulatorRoot`

#### Subprotocols

##### Verifier

> Verifiers prove new `Commit` generated from a blockchain. It is expected to prove 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifiers prove new `Header` generated from a blockchain. It is expected to prove 
```

> a `Commit` efficiently; efficient then replaying `Consensus` logic for given parent `Commit`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a `Header` efficiently; more efficiently then replaying `Consensus` logic for given parent `Header`
```

> a `Commit` efficiently; efficient then replaying `Consensus` logic for given parent `Commit`

Reviewer: ... and we need to be more specific, verification should be `O(constant)` basically

and the transactions. 

##### Accumulator Root

> `TrustedCommit` contains an accumulator root, which identifies the whole state of the corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RootOfTrust` contains an accumulator root, which identifies the whole state of the corresponding
```

blockchain at the point of time that the commit is generated. It is expected that the verifying 
inclusion or exclusion of certain data in the accumulator is done efficient. See ICS23 for the details
about the `AccumulatorRoot`s.

##### CommitProof

`CommitProof` is a type dependent on concrete implementations of `Commit`. `TrustedCommit.v` uses
the information stored in `Commit.p` to check `Commit.tc`. 

##### Consensus 

`Consensus` is a blockchain protocol which actually generates a list of `Commit`. 

1. Headers have no more than one direct child
 
* Satisfied if: deterministic safety

> * Possible violation scenario: validator double signing, miner double spend

Reviewer: Double-spends and double-signing are pretty different, do you mean a fork of Nakamoto consensus?

Author: Yes, deep reorg might be better phrasing.

2. Headers have at least one direct child

* Satisfied if: liveness, lightclient verifier continuability

> * Possible violation scenario: synchronized halt, incompatible hard fork

Reviewer: What is a synchronized halt?

Author: More than 1/3 of the validators goes offline at once. Can be happened on a less decentralized network.

Reviewer: Is that actually a requirement of safety here?

I think we need to be more specific. Certainly all headers won't have a direct child at any point in time, as there will be one final header (the head of the chain).

Ideally we could analyze what happens under safety and liveness faults separately - the latter should be much less damaging, maybe some problems with timeouts.

Author: Per discussion: the packet semantics(not connection semantics) are relying on the partial synchrony assumption on the packets since the timeout logic is depending on the receiving chain's height. We should include that in the protocol. The damage analysis and the recovery methods on the safety/liveness fault should be separated, the amount of impact and the method that has to be applied in each case are pretty different. The safety can be addressed in #6 and #53.

Author: Opened #63 for liveness

> 3. Headers' accumulator root are valid transition from the parents'

Reviewer: Can you explain this? A bad accumulator root would prevent further verification.

We assume throughout that both blockchains' state machines implement the IBC protocol correctly, which is a stronger assumption, so I think we can probably just say that instead.

* Satisfied if: decentralized block generation, well implemented state machine
* Possible violation scenario: invariant break, validator cartel

If a block is submitted to the chain(and optionally passed some challenge period for fraud proof), 
then it is assured that the packet is finalized so the application logic can process it.
If a header is proven to violate one of the properties, the tracking chain should detect and take
action on the event to prevent further impact. See (link for the ICS for equivocation and fraud proof) 
for details.

### Example Implementation

> An example blockchain `B` is run by a single operator. If a block is signed by the operator, 

Reviewer: Delete this section? Let's just reference sub-ICS with implementations once we write those.

"Coming soon" is fine for now.

Author: Added a simple example where the headers are signed by a single entity and the entity can be changed.

---
ics: 2
title: Consensus Requirements
stage: proposal
category: ibc-core
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
created: 2019-02-25
modified: 2019-03-05
---

The IBC protocol creates a mechanism by which two replicated fault-tolerant state machines may pass messages to each other. These messages provide a base layer for the creation of communicating blockchain architecture that overcomes challenges in the scalability and extensibility of computing blockchain environments.

> The IBC protocol assumes that multiple applications are running on their own blockchain with their own state and own logic. Communication is achieved over an ordered message queue primitive, allowing the creation of complex inter-chain processes without trusted third parties.

Reviewer 2: First two paragraphs seem like relatively common preamble that we can maybe eliminate?

In order to achive this, a blockchain should be able to check 1. whether the block is valid and 2. whether the packet is included in the block or not. In this proposal, we introduce an abstract concept of blockchains, called `Header`. `Header` requires its consensus algorithm to satisfy some properties, including deterministic safety, lightclient compatibility and valid transition of the state machine.

## Specification

### Motivation

`Header` defines required properties of the blockchain on the network. The implementors can check whether the consensus that they are using is qualified to be connected to the network or not. If not, they can modify the algorithm or wrap it with additional logic to make it compatible with the specification.

### Desired Properties

> `Header` is `(p : Maybe<Header>, v : Header -> bool, s : []byte -> []byte)` where `p` is parent block, `v` is lightclient verifier and `s` is state. The other parts of the protocol, such as connections and channels, are defined over `Header`s, so if a blockchain wants to establish an IBC communication with another, it is required to satisfy the properties of `Header`. 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be `v: Header -> Header -> bool`, needing the parent and the child?

I'm not sure how you handle indirect children, but maybe you want to replace `bool` with an enum `Validity = IsChild | IsNotChild | NeedIntermediateStep`

Author: Will it be possible for the verifiers to verify whether the verified header is not a child or needs an intermediate step, in general cases?

> `Header` is `(p : Maybe<Header>, v : Header -> bool, s : []byte -> []byte)` where `p` is parent block, `v` is lightclient verifier and `s` is state. The other parts of the protocol, such as connections and channels, are defined over `Header`s, so if a blockchain wants to establish an IBC communication with another, it is required to satisfy the properties of `Header`. 

Reviewer 2: Isn't this missing more details like the validator set ? Or is that assumed to be part of Header or State ?

Reviewer 2: Also shouldn't `v` also be a function of `s` ?

Author: Yes the details will be defined in the respective header icss, like in #13, which will define tendermint lightclient specification.

Header already contains `s`, so I guess we don't need it as an argument.

Definitions:

1. Direct children have their parent as `p` and are verifiable with their parent.

> 2. The height of a block is the step of referring `p` required to get to `nil`

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence needs to be clearer

> 

Reviewer 2: Add definitions for:

- Deterministic Safety
- Light client (?)

Requirements:

> 1. Headers have only one direct child

Reviewer 3: If there is a chain with probabalistic finality using some BFT overlay to produce "checkpoints" at "epochs", then could we consider these "checkpoints" as Headers for the purposes of IBC, while the rest of the block headers do not satisfy the ibc `Header` property?

Author: Definitely. These definitions will cover the finality overlays on nondeterministic finality chains, such as pegzones, Casper FFG, etc.

> If a blockchain has deterministic safety(as opposed to probabilistic safety in Nakamoto consensus), then there cannot be more than one child for each block. In Tendermint, this assumption breaks when +1/3 validators are malicious, producing multiple blocks those are direct children of a single block and all of them are verifiable with the parent. It makes conflicting packets delivered from the failed chain, so for the chains who are receiving from this chain, **fraud proof #10** mechanism should be applied in this case. However, he failed chain itself also need to be recovered and reconnected again. It will be covered in **byzantine recovery strategies #6**.

Reviewer 2: Can we text wrap so paragraphs don't show up as single lines please.

Actually we should probably add textwrapping to the ICS-1 ?

Reviewer 2: Seems like we have some excessive discussion here that doesn't quite fit under *Requirements* - maybe should be moved to a discussion section of this ICS?

Author: My mistake, not familiar with the specification format yet :sweat_smile:

> 2. Headers have at least one direct child

Reviewer 2: So requirements are:

1. Header.children == 1
2. Header.children >= 1

This should be cleaned up somehow

There is at least one direct child for all blocks, meaning that the lightclient logic can proceed the blocks one by one even in the worst case. If it not satisfied then there can be a point where the lightclient stops and cannot proceed, which halts IBC connection unexpectedly. This also can be violated when the blocks are restarted out of the consensus, for example in Tendermint, (1/2 < validators < 2/3) forked out the chain. This also will be covered in **byzantine recovery strategies**.

3. If a block verifies another block then it is a descendant of the block
Lightclient should not verify packets which are not in its chain. If the verifier returns true for a block that is not a descendant, it simply means that there is an error in the lightclient logic.

> 4. Header can have a state only if it is a valid transition from the parent's(see the next paragraph)

Reviewer 3: This is not a property of the consensus logic, but rather the application logic on the chain, correct?
Tendermint could run great and enforce 1-3, but a buggy abci app may violate 4.

Maybe this needs to be addressed at another level (eg. this is a valid state from a valid child of a trusted parent, *but* the data contained is not "proper").

Author: Since now we removed the `Connection` and `Channel` from the consensus requirements we can remove this too. The `KVStore` definition should be placed here.

Header cannot have a state which is not a transition from its parent. This requires that the chain satisfies the IBC protocol and runs it honestly. In case where the validators become malicious and send invalid messages, the application logic on the destination chain should prevent further interchain infection.
 
These requirements allow channels to work safely without concerning about double spending attack. 
If a block is submitted to the chain(and optionally passed some challenge period for fraud proof), then it is assured that the packet is finalized so the application logic can process it.

### Technical Specification

In a real world, `Header`s do not have to contain the full state data; it can contain an aggregated data set identifier, for example a merkle root, where the actual data latter given can be proven that it is a member of that set. If we don't consider about the data availability problem, this partial blocks, which is be called `Header`s, still satisfies `Header`.

Following functions exist over `Header`s.

* `height : Header -> int`
Returns the height of the block.

* `verify : Header -> Header -> Maybe<LightClientProof> -> Maybe<error>`

> Verifies the latter block is a descendant of the former block, as defined in **lightclient specification**. Can take an additional lightclient proof argument.

Reviewer 2: Is **lightclient specification** referring to https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/13 ? 

We should make the dependency clear up front somewhere

Author: I made a comment in #25: https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/25#issuecomment-476727693 will reflect that on the spec file

Reviewer: I think this function should instead return a new `RootOfTrust`, or we should have an extra function for that purpose.

Reviewer: Oh I guess you mean `RootOfTrust` when you say `Header` - we should switch those, `Header` is the `LightClientProof` consensus transcript fragment type.

Reviewer: Maybe `verifyAndUpdate : RootOfTrust -> Header -> Either Error RootOfTrust`

Reviewer 3: I like this statement to update trust

> * `state : Header -> [MerkleProof] -> Error | KVStore`

Reviewer 3: Took a bit to see how we get a KVStore, but I see this as a "partial" KV Store representing a proveable subset of the entire blockchain state the Header refers to. With that understanding, I like it quite a bit. Very elegant representation

Reviewer 2: We should disambiguate this with the previous definition of a state as `s: []byte->[]byte`

Reviewer: I don't understand how we can return a `KVStore` here, since we don't actually have the data, it's returned on-demand.

Additionally, I think we should abstract `MerkleProof` to `Accumulator`, but keep the key-value abstraction.

Maybe `verifySubstate : RootOfTrust -> Key -> Value -> Maybe Error`

We might need slightly different semantics for range exclusion proofs, which I think we should include in these requirements. Ideally the function can encapsulate both.

Reviewer: (where `type Key = type Value = []byte`)

Reviewer 3: If we assume MerkleProofs come with Key and Value, this is much nicer for the data availability problem.

The point I assume is that we get a trusted header and N `MerkleProofs`, each containing `{Key, Value, HashPathToRoot}`. We can verify them and, on succcess, return a partial KVStore, containing only the keys related to the proofs provided. This is guaranteed to be a subset of the complete KVStore on the blockchain that match the header.

Author: From the discussion: what we are using from the header is essentially the accumulator root. Headers can implement function `getRoot`, which simply returns the accumulator root, and the rest can be moved into the other ICS for accumulators. This will make the interface as minimal as possible.

Returns a `KVStore` with the state inside the header. Can take Merkle proofs for the key-value pairs proving that the pairs are part of the header state.

### Example Implementation

An example blockchain `B` is run by a single operator. If a block is signed by the operator, then it is valid. `B` contains `KVStore`, which is a associative list with type of `[([byte], [byte])]`.  

### Other Implementations

> * Cosmos-SDK: [](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/ibc)  

Reviewer 3: Please update link to https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/develop/x/ibc or other desired branch (Provided link gives 404 and should have some text as well

Reviewer: I think we can leave this out of the spec until it's actually implemented

---
ics: 2
title: Consensus Requirements

> stage: Proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stage: proposal
```

category: ibc-core

> author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com> Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Juwoon Yun <joon@tendermint.com>, Christopher Goes <cwgoes@tendermint.com>
```

4. Block can have a state only if it is a valid transition from the parent's(see the next paragraph)
Block cannot have a state which is not a transition from its parent. Since the state is only defined for IBC logic, this only means that each block are running IBC-compatible application logic(does not care about the other modules' failure, including the handlers for the packets).

These requirements allow channels to work safely without concerning about double spending attack. 
If a block is submitted to the chain(and optionally passed some challenge period for fraud proof), then it is assured that the packet is finalized so the application logic can process it.

### Technical Specification

In a real world, `Block`s do not have to contain the full state data; it can contain an aggregated data set identifier, for example a merkle root, where the actual data latter given can be proven that it is a member of that set. If we don't consider about the data availability problem, this partial blocks, which is be called `Header`s, still satisfies `Block`.

Following functions exist over `Header`s.

> * `height : Header -> int`

Reviewer: What do we need this for? Bisection?

Author: Yes, but maybe we can make `verify` to handle it(in `Maybe<LightClientProof>`)

Reviewer: I think that would be cleaner.

Author: Height is still needed: the verifier needs to get the trusted header in prior to verification which requires height information.

Reviewer: I don't think I understand, let's discuss this.

Returns the height of the block.

> * `verify : Header -> Header -> Maybe<LightClientProof> -> bool`

Reviewer: What is the `Maybe<LightClientProof>` for?

Can this return `Maybe<error>` instead?

Author: An optional LightClientProof argument, actual implementation will depends on the Header implementation.

Yes.

Verifies the latter block is a descendant of the former block, as defined in **lightclient specification**. Can take an additional lightclient proof argument.

> * `connection : Header -> ChainID -> Maybe<MemberProof> -> Connection`

Reviewer: Do we need to define this in consensus requirements or can it be defined as part of the protocol negotiation handshake?

Author: I included `Connection` and `Channel` in order to exclude `KVStore` semantics in header definition, but it seems like including `KVStore` will be better.

Author: I included `Connection` and `Channel` in order to exclude `KVStore` semantics in header definition, but it seems like including `KVStore` will be better.

Returns the connection for `ChainID` as defined in **connection semantics**. Can take an additional set member proof argument.

* `channel : Header -> ChainID -> PortID -> Channel`
Returns the channel for `(ChainID, PortID)` pair, as defined in **channel semantics**. Can take an additional set member proof argument.

### Example Implementation

> An example blockchain `B` is run by a single operator. If a block is signed by the operator, then it is valid. `B` contains `KVStore`, which is a mapping from `[byte]` to  `[byte]`. 

Reviewer: Good example - I find the pseudocode a bit confusing though, can we make it a bit more like the ICS 1 example?
